doc/syntax/statements.markdown, before:

% Statements

All statements use `{% %}` delimiters. The `{%-` and `-%}` variations remove
all whitespace (including line breaks) to the left and right respectively.

# `if`

The `{% if %}` statement evaluates an expression and branches based on its
truthiness.

## Simple form:

```ginger
{% if condition %}
True branch body
{% endif %}
```

## With else branch:

```ginger
{% if condition %}
True branch body
{% else %}
False branch body
{% endif %}
```

## With else-if branches:

```ginger
{% if condition1 %}
True branch body
{% elif condition2 %}
Other branch body
{% else %}
False branch body
{% endif %}
```

# `switch`

For branching into multiple branches based on one expression, use `{% switch
%}`:

```ginger
{% switch expression %}
  {% case value1 %}
    Value 1 body
  {% endcase %}
  {% case value2 %}
    Value 2 body
  {% endcase %}
  {% default %}
    Default body
  {% enddefault %}
{% endswitch %}
```

# `set`

`{% set varname = expression %}` defines a variable and sets it to the value of
the `expression`.

# `include`

`{% include "filename" %}` reads a file and injects it into the template
exactly where the `include` is written.

# `scope`

`{% scope %}...{% endscope %}` creates an explicit local scope:

- variables defined inside the scope disappear when the scope is left
- variables defined outside the scope are available inside it
- variables defined outside the scope and again inside it will take on the
  value from inside the scope while inside, but revert to the value from
  outside after leaving the scope

# `indent`

`{% indent %}...{% endindent %}` creates an indentation scope using the default
indent (two spaces)

`{% indent expr %}...{% endindent %}` interprets `expr` as an indent and
creates a matching indentation scope.

Indentation blocks can be nested.

The topmost indentation block removes all existing indentation; all nested
indentation blocks add their respective indents to the surrounding ones.

Indentation blocks cover all line endings in the output, regardless of whether
they come from literal output (bare text), interpolations, macro invocations,
or includes.

Indentation level is determined from the runtime context, so if you put an
indentation block inside a macro and call it from another indentation block,
the two will nest as if you had written the macro body directly into the
calling context. This means that the following:

```ginger
{%- macro foobar %}
{% indent '' %}
<div>
{% indent '  ' %}
<h1>Hello!</h1>
{% endindent %}
</div>
{% endindent %}
{% endmacro -%}


{% indent %}
<body>
{{ foobar() }}
</body>
{% endindent }
```

...will render as:

```html
<body>
  <div>
    <h1>Hello!</h1>
  </div>
</body>
```

Thus, `{% indent %}` allows authors to write reusable template code that
produces correct indentation.

# `macro`

`{% macro name(arg0,...) %}...{% endmacro %}` defines a macro named `name`.
Once defined, the macro can be called like a function or filter. Alternatively,
macros can be called using the `{% call %}` construct, see below.

# `call`

`{% call (arg0) name(arg1) %}body{% endcall %}` calls the macro named `name`
with argument `arg1`; inside the macro's body, a special function named
`caller` is available that takes an argument which will then be passed back
into the body of the `call` statement. If this makes your brain hurt, read the
example in our simulation tests, reproduced here for convenience:

Template:

```ginger
{% macro foobar3(a) -%}
  {{ a }}({{ caller("asdf") }})
{%- endmacro -%}

{%- call (a) foobar3("hey") -%}
<{{a}}>
{%- endcall %}
```

Output:

```html
hey(<asdf>)
```

# `extends`
# `block`

These two together implement *template inheritance*. Here's how it works:

- First, you write a parent template, which is really just a regular template.
  However, some parts of it are enclosed in `{% block blockname %}` ... `{%
  endblock %}`
- Then you write a child template, which starts with an `{% include
  'parent-template-name' %}` statement, followed by zero or more blocks. These
  blocks override the content of the blocks of the same name in the parent
  template.
- Blocks can be nested; in that case, the child template can choose to override
  the outer block (thereby removing the inner block entirely), or override the
  inner block (leaving the rest of the containing block unchanged).
- Blocks that are not overridden, as well as content outside of any blocks, is
  copied from the parent template.

# `script`

The `{% script %}` statement introduces a Script Mode Block. Inside a script
block, Ginger uses an alternate syntax that is more similar to an imperative
programming language like C or JavaScript, and less similar to a regular
template language. Most of the statements are still available, but the syntax
is different: for example, `{% for i in items %}{{ item }}{% endfor %}` becomes
`for (i in items) { echo(item); }`. For full details, see [Script
Mode](script.html).

Commit message:

Update {% indent %} documentation
Now documenting the actual source indent stripping behavior.

doc/syntax/statements.markdown, after:

% Statements

All statements use `{% %}` delimiters. The `{%-` and `-%}` variations remove
all whitespace (including line breaks) to the left and right respectively.

# `if`

The `{% if %}` statement evaluates an expression and branches based on its
truthiness.

## Simple form:

```ginger
{% if condition %}
True branch body
{% endif %}
```

## With else branch:

```ginger
{% if condition %}
True branch body
{% else %}
False branch body
{% endif %}
```

## With else-if branches:

```ginger
{% if condition1 %}
True branch body
{% elif condition2 %}
Other branch body
{% else %}
False branch body
{% endif %}
```

# `switch`

For branching into multiple branches based on one expression, use `{% switch
%}`:

```ginger
{% switch expression %}
  {% case value1 %}
    Value 1 body
  {% endcase %}
  {% case value2 %}
    Value 2 body
  {% endcase %}
  {% default %}
    Default body
  {% enddefault %}
{% endswitch %}
```

# `set`

`{% set varname = expression %}` defines a variable and sets it to the value of
the `expression`.

# `include`

`{% include "filename" %}` reads a file and injects it into the template
exactly where the `include` is written.

# `scope`

`{% scope %}...{% endscope %}` creates an explicit local scope:

- variables defined inside the scope disappear when the scope is left
- variables defined outside the scope are available inside it
- variables defined outside the scope and again inside it will take on the
  value from inside the scope while inside, but revert to the value from
  outside after leaving the scope

# `indent`

`{% indent %}...{% endindent %}` creates an indentation scope using the default
indent (two spaces)

`{% indent expr %}...{% endindent %}` interprets `expr` as an indent and
creates a matching indentation scope.

Indentation blocks can be nested.

Existing indentation in the template source is removed inside `{% indent %}`
blocks, based on the indentation of the first line after the opening
`{% indent %}` tag. After that first line, all subsequent lines that begin with
the same indent will have it stripped, while any additional whitespace will be
kept, as will whitespace sequences that differ from the first line.

After that, indentation blocks add one level of indentation, except for the
outermost one, which serves just to establish the indentation context in the
first place.

Indentation blocks cover all line endings in the output, regardless of whether
they come from literal output (bare text), interpolations, macro invocations,
or includes.

Indentation level is determined from the runtime context, so if you put an
indentation block inside a macro and call it from another indentation block,
the two will nest as if you had written the macro body directly into the
calling context. This means that the following:

```ginger
{%- macro foobar %}
{% indent '' %}
<div>
{% indent '  ' %}
<h1>Hello!</h1>
{% endindent %}
</div>
{% endindent %}
{% endmacro -%}


{% indent %}
<body>
{{ foobar() }}
</body>
{% endindent }
```

...will render as:

```html
<body>
  <div>
    <h1>Hello!</h1>
  </div>
</body>
```

Thus, `{% indent %}` allows authors to write reusable template code that
produces correct indentation.

# `macro`

`{% macro name(arg0,...) %}...{% endmacro %}` defines a macro named `name`.
Once defined, the macro can be called like a function or filter. Alternatively,
macros can be called using the `{% call %}` construct, see below.

# `call`

`{% call (arg0) name(arg1) %}body{% endcall %}` calls the macro named `name`
with argument `arg1`; inside the macro's body, a special function named
`caller` is available that takes an argument which will then be passed back
into the body of the `call` statement. If this makes your brain hurt, read the
example in our simulation tests, reproduced here for convenience:

Template:

```ginger
{% macro foobar3(a) -%}
  {{ a }}({{ caller("asdf") }})
{%- endmacro -%}

{%- call (a) foobar3("hey") -%}
<{{a}}>
{%- endcall %}
```

Output:

```html
hey(<asdf>)
```

# `extends`
# `block`

These two together implement *template inheritance*. Here's how it works:

- First, you write a parent template, which is really just a regular template.
  However, some parts of it are enclosed in `{% block blockname %}` ... `{%
  endblock %}`
- Then you write a child template, which starts with an `{% include
  'parent-template-name' %}` statement, followed by zero or more blocks. These
  blocks override the content of the blocks of the same name in the parent
  template.
- Blocks can be nested; in that case, the child template can choose to override
  the outer block (thereby removing the inner block entirely), or override the
  inner block (leaving the rest of the containing block unchanged).
- Blocks that are not overridden, as well as content outside of any blocks, is
  copied from the parent template.

# `script`

The `{% script %}` statement introduces a Script Mode Block. Inside a script
block, Ginger uses an alternate syntax that is more similar to an imperative
programming language like C or JavaScript, and less similar to a regular
template language. Most of the statements are still available, but the syntax
is different: for example, `{% for i in items %}{{ item }}{% endfor %}` becomes
`for (i in items) { echo(item); }`. For full details, see [Script
Mode](script.html).
